Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Hello.
Good afternoon.
Good
afternoon.
So we have Rob, uh, Harrison and, uh, Martin?
That's correct.
Thank you so much. Um, so we have 30 minutes with you.
So if you would like to start, um, by, uh, providing some opening
remarks, and then we will have questions from members.
Sure. Let me open. I'm, I'm Martin Matthews, I'm chair of the board.
Rob Harrison, who's chief executive.
Thank you for the opportunity to, to meet with you today.
Um,
can I open by kind of firstly just putting our role a little bit in context?
And I'll let Rob say a little bit more about this.
But even though we're a state ente- enterprise and
charged with the role of acting commercially, we see our
role as actually being critical to basically
every f- facet of life and activity in New Zealand.
If you think about the impact weather has, uh, on
our nation, uh, it's quite s- significant and
increasingly so. So it's a role that we take very
seriously. Um,
and a role we have, you know, although we're charged with
acting commercially, we think very hard about kinda how we
serve our customers, communities, citizens, businesses
to ensure that people can better manage the impact of
weather. Uh, you, I'm sure, are well aware of the
bill that's with this committee now, um, with the proposal
for MetService to eventually become part of the
new Earth Sciences New Zealand, should that bill be enacted.
Uh, I should say at the outset, this is something we support as
a, as a, as a company, as a, as a weather forecasting
agency. We support the need for ensuring that
we have a fit for the future weather forecast and climate system for New
Zealand. Uh, the ability to bring the
capabilities of the two organizations together
is, I think, a really significant opportunity to ensure that we can do a
better job for the future of New Zealand and help manage the impact of
weather and changing climate. With that, I'll hand over to Rob to say a little bit
more.
Yeah. Thanks, Martin, and good afternoon, everybody.
Um, so you, you'll all know MetService as,
uh, the New, New Zealand's, um, authorized and trusted
provider of weather warnings and our national weather
service. Um, but MetService's role goes well beyond
this. Y- you know, what we do isn't just about providing weather
forecasts, data and expertise. It's critical to what we do
is creating that connection between the weather intelligence and
all of our varied, um,
customers and their particular needs, and of course
all New Zealanders who have, uh, preferences and needs to receive
and access weather information that makes sense to them, and ultimately
helps them, um, make the decisions that they need to make.
So that's really what MetService is all about.
We wrap that up in our purpose which kind of drives the organization,
so making easy connections to weather intelligence so we're
all ready for any weather. And that speaks to,
um, the weather intelligence bit about the core of our organization,
but, um, the importance of connecting with customers and the
public, um, to, to enable weather resilience and weather
response.
Um, fundamental to our DNA is providing
operational high quality robust services, um,
24/7, 365 days a year. And our
customers span across government,
councils and emergency response, agriculture,
aviation, marine transport, energy, the list goes on.
You know, it w- you know, we, we are connected across the country and also
internationally to enable decision-making based on weather.
Um, reaching the public is critical to what we do.
We're really proud of, um, progress we're making to just
maintain our connections to the public in this time of r- a really
rapid change in the media landscape.
So, you know, we, we put a lot of work into creating channels that,
um, enable people to access, um, the information that we
have. We've got some really, um, really good stats around
that. And the final piece of our jigsaw is that
relationships with our customers, they're absolutely critical and we,
um, spend a lot of time nurturing and building those customer
relationships. Um, and our only great people that we have at
MetS- MetService, committed, knowledgeable, are a fundamental
part of, um, the customer satisfaction that we have.
So that's, uh, our opening remarks and um-
Answer questions.
Thank you so much. Um, Scott Willis?
Well, firstly, um, how is the, how is the merging
going with Earth Sciences? That's a, you know, I know, I know it
was, um, signaled a long time ago-
Yeah.
... there was gonna be some change, but how's that
rolling out?
Can I open w- with a brief comment, um, 'cause we're working very
closely both at a governance and an executive level
simply because, as I said e- earlier and as Rob has reinforced, we, we support
this change. So we're working very closely.
Um, obviously we're all mindful that we can't do certain things until
the enabling legislation is in place, but, uh, Rob is
co-leading, um, the work to ensure we're well-prepared
when the legislation, uh, is in place, but Rob?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Um, you know, there, there's, um, there's significant
opportunity in bringing MetService in- into Earth Sciences
as a subs- as a subsidiary organization.Looking at Earth Sciences and
MetService, essentially our capabilities are
complementary. And, um, and, and bringing the
organizations together will enable forecasting of
we- not only weather, but also climate and associated
impacts to, um, a level far greater than we're able to
do right now. So, um, that'll bring huge benefits
to, um,
both national resilience but a- also the economy as we, as we're able
to extend what we're able to do for our very customers.
So essentially, this is about being able to achieve much
more through that combination of capabilities.
Do you want to comment a little bit about the process that we're following with
Earth Sciences at the moment?
Yeah. Thanks, Martin. So, well, obviously, this is...
We're h- fully aware this is all subject to legislation, and there are a few
constraints that we have to work in currently, such as competition and
law. But we're working really well with Earth Sciences.
We've got a, um,
project running to, um, maximize this opportunity and really
design the future state before we have to shift to
that. Um,
I- I'm co-leading that with, um, a ca- a counterpart within Earth
Sciences. We have a, we run a steering group, and then there's some
oversight provided from a gover- Governance Oversight Group, which is two
directors from MetService, two directors from Earth Sciences,
plus the two chief executives and, and a couple of other staff that are working on
the project. So, it's going really well.
We've made significant progress over the last six months.
And, um, you know, change always brings some challenges,
but in the whole, everyone's pretty excited about the future.
Mm. That's really interesting.
Yeah. So, um, in the, in the merger, you've talked
about
beefing up capability essentially, merging weather with
climate, et cetera.
Mm-hmm.
We've certainly, in the Deep South, we've seen the effects of some extreme weather-
Mm.
... reasonably recently.
So, thinking about how, how that
capability may grow as you merge with Earth
Sciences, how do you think that's gonna
help? How are, how are you going to be able to communicate that, that
new, new approach?
Mm-hmm.
What's, what's that looking like?
What are you, what are you putting in place now, I guess-
Yeah.
... for where, where you're going?
Yeah. Um, so a couple of, a couple of really key examples
there. Uh, f- firstly, MetService
currently is, is focused very much on that operational forecasting
timescale, days we, da-days maybe a week ahead, and,
um, responding to extreme weather events.
Integrating with Earth Sciences, it enables a much better connection
between longer term planning timescales.
So, you know, what are the weather conditions of the future expected to
look like? How can that flow through to planning and
designing infrastructure, et cetera, et cetera, in ways that are resilient to
future weather, uh, and not just current
weather? But then, but then that, um, kind of
long-term planning horizon can get integrated into, well, what
about, um, the summer season ahead?
Are we looking at, um, drier than average, wetter than average?
What does that mean for managing my agriculture business?
And then through to, you know, the next, the next week, the next few
days, and, and managing those high impacts of weather events.
So connecting across that timescale, I see as a really big
opportunity. And the other aspect is
extending from weather to, um,
the vision that we have within our co-design project with, with Earth Sciences is
forecasting of weather, climate, and associated
impacts. So it's, so it's, you know, what, what is the weather
forecast to be? But what will that do?
You know, what will that mean in terms of, um,
flooding in, in partnership with regional councils,
uh, land, landslips, droughts? Um, the actual
impacts that weather, that people and businesses experience of being able
to f- a bit forecast more, in a more integrated way, those
impacts.
And can I just reinforce that? 'Cause I think the, the vision very much is about
sort of, it's one thing to forecast what the weather will be, it's
another thing to start to actually get much more effective
at being able to describe the impact so that people can be better
prepared for those events.
Mm, mm-hmm.
So, the bringing together, not just of the climate, but the, the hydrology
functions of earth science and so on-
Mm.
... actually start to kind of allow you to see possibilities that
actually ultimately mean that the sort of, the
warning system and the messaging to, to citizens, to
communities, to businesses can be a whole lot more effective.
Yeah. I'll ask a quick sup here. So, how are you managing your international
brand, um, in this kind of phase? Uh, it's Metra
Weather?
Mm.
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, um, Me- MetrWeather's a real Kiwi
success story, actually, in that we've, um, you know, we've managed to really grow
that overseas, uh, weather business on the back of the capability that we've
developed in, for New Zealand over, over the last few years.
And we've seen really strong growth in Australia, uh,
recently. Um,
we haven't got into the details of what this, um,
w- what this will mean for MetRuaWeather, other than the assumption that, um,
a- actually, you know, that, that's an, that's an asset that we can
protect and actually grow more in the future.
So, we see, I think, I think both entities see that as an
opportunity. And of course, um, just like the
example that we've talked about in terms of the Deep South and opportunities in New
Zealand, there are opportunities for Me- to grow MetRuaWeather's capability through
pulling through, um, more of what exists within Earth Sciences.
Mm.
Um, we've got a really strong team that, um, that
leads MetRuaWeather re- and, and, uh, is competing really effectively with some of
the biggest weather companies in the world.
Interesting.
Can I perhaps add also, uh, although your question is around
MetRuaWeather, you, you, your reference to the s- the
brand. A- and I do think, uh, one of the, one of the decisions
the government made, uh, as part of this process was that-
... MetService would be retained at least for up to three years as a fully
owned subsidiary.
Mm-hmm.
And we're very conscious of the strength of the MetService brand,
not just for commercial reasons, but actually for the s- this, this sort
of importance of being the authoritative voice
around weather. And so, uh, we fully expect, at
least for the foreseeable future, the MetService brand to still
be the key, kind of, um,
outward-facing, um, uh, brand for, for
weather forecasting impacts. So notwithstanding the change in
institutional arrangements, the brand is important.
Mm. Mm.
Mm.
Okay. Uh, Scott Willis for the supplementaries.
Thank you. Mm. I think it might be supplementary, I'm not sure.
(laughs) Um, or primary.
(laughs) Okay, it's primary.
Um,
um, I'm wondering if you could help me understand the, the way
in which you manage the public good side of
Ne- MetService and, and the, and the commercial side.
Because given that we are moving into a, a
climate-challenged future with more extreme weather events, more
greater variability-
Mm-hmm.
... our energy system, for example, when we're 100% renewable
electricity, not just for electricity but for energy, will
require
understanding what, what weather events-
Mm-hmm.
... come up. We'll, we'll need to understand-
(laughs)
... in advance of when a dry year, a dry winter's going to
hit. We'll need to understand solar and, and the
change in wind patterns for building wind farms.
Mm-hmm.
All of those things, there's a large public good element-
Mm.
... to all of that. How are you managing, how are you managing
that, the commercial imperative along with the public good?
Yep.
Yeah. Um, you know, it's, uh, it's, um, it's a discussion we have around the
executive leadership table quite often on MetService.
The, the way we look at it, um, essentially is that,
um,
pretty much everything we do leads to a public good benefit in some
way. You know, w- we're, we're all about helping,
um, councils or those business sectors be more
effective in their decision-making.
Um, and the, and the commercial n- nature of what we do, um, really
translates through to customer centricity.
So you know, to, to, for, to enable that exchange of value in
our commercial contracts to work, we have to deliver
on, um, providing value to our customers. So I think it's...
The way, the way that I think of it is, the better job we do
of, um, our commercial and customer-centric business,
the more public good we're able to do.
And I think it's, uh, MetService has been an example of the SOE model working
pretty well in that regard.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and, you know, the intention is to retain
the stuff that works really well in terms of how, how we, how
MetService is customer-centric, delivers that value to customers.
And then at the overall economic, the benefit that comes from that in, in the
future setup.
Mm-hmm.
Okay, final sub Scott Willis and then I go to Reuben. Yeah.
Um,
do you think there, would... There is merit given the decarbonization
journey we're on and the, the urgency that we, we
pursue that, that we, we look to put more
focus on that public good element?
Because understanding what's happening with our weather is
absolutely critical to, to how, how we do that and, and, and
how-
Yeah. W- we, um,
we had a really good look at the, um, value returned from the
MetService Ministry of Transport contract.
So we hold a tran- a contract with the Ministry of Transport for the overall
national weather service provision.
Um, it's particularly the weather warnings
program. And we did some economic, um, got a third party to
do some economic work on that, which basically, um, showed that
the, uh, benefit-cost ratio of that investment from the government was
somewhere in the range of 10:1 to 48:1.
So in simple terms, you know, $1 investment from the Crown results in a
$48
benefit to the nation. So that, that's the level of public good that's
possible 'cause w- we're a good investment
(laughs) case. At the same time, you know, we, we're fully aware
of the, um, you know, the range of different priorities across New Zealand.
So, uh, somewhat realistic in terms of, um, you
know, what's possible in terms of government investment.
And therefore, um, adding to that with our, with our customer-centric
commercial business is, is the way that we've been able to maximize our
impact. And we, and we think that can c- can continue.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you.
Yep.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair. The, the report speaks to, um, New
Zealanders accessing weather information from social media
platforms.
Mm.
Your weather information.
Yep.
That is, from social-
... from, from social media platforms-
Yeah.
... um, increasingly. Do you have
the s- the sufficient
funding and infrastructure to staff, moderate, and, and
deliver that?
Yeah. Um,
so, you know, 20 years ago people got their weather
information from One News and from the radio-
Mm-hmm.
... and that was the source of MetService brand recognition, et cetera, et cetera.
And that's, um, changed slowly and then incredibly rapidly
over the last five years. Um, we have
invested quite a bit in being able to move with those changing
times in media. Um, we have
changed our media delivery model quite successfully to be, to
providing, um, more content in different forms and different
ways, you know, that's appropriate for social media, for
example. Um, so I think we've, I think we, I
think, I think our, and our, and our engagement numbers are pretty good.
They're not, they're not where I want them to be, but 1, 1,
1,000,000 on average views of our website and app every day, 400,000
social me- social media follow- followers, 8,000
stories in the media, um-... quoting a represent Met-
MetService over this, over this period. So, they're pretty good numbers.
We can push them further, um, and I- and- and we,
um... Hey, as chief executive, I'd- I'd always want more
resources in these areas, but we can make it work with what we've got.
(coughs)
So, that's ballpark, what sort of dollar figure put on
what is m- the resource that's required to keep those feeds
updated, moderated?
Oh. You know, um, m- multiple... Oh, oh, just the social
media bit is, um, you know,
le- less th- less than a million dollars-
Yeah.
... I would, I would say.
... you know, we- we do have a commercial model built around
our
web, and app, and- and media content.
And, of course, it's all pa- social media is all part of that ecosystem.
You know, social media is a way to build our brand and then, um, enco-
encourage people to be MetService fans, download our app like, hopefully,
this committee has. And, um, and tha- and that all feeds into the, into
the mo- the commercial model surrounding our public weather content.
It is an interesting sort of area though.
We are, you know-
Mm-hmm.
... we are actively thinking about, again, how we have to continue to
evolve the deliv- delivery kind of methods and approaches,
particularly actually-
Yeah.
... uh, notwithstanding questions around social media, the significant
changes that are occurring in mainstream kind of, um,
media and the kind of viability that they have.
Those are still important vehicles to certain segments of,
of society and for sort of the brand.
And so w- we have a- actively thinking about how do we continue
to adapt, and that's not gonna change.
But I do think, um,
d- d- uh, you know, it's helpful to, I believe, reinforce a point Rob made
ou- ou- am- couple of minutes ago, which is actually one of the sort
of significant advantages of the sort of
customer-centric focus which the commercial model has driven for
us is that MetService, I think,
is m- probably more so than most other
national meteorological organizations, is
really innovative and thoughtful about how it communicates
and engages with its customers and the public, because
it's kind of part of our DNA. So, um, it's a really
important kinda aspect of how, how we conduct ourselves
day-to-day.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Sub from Jan Timme?
Yeah. I... Look, I... When I read your report, I was reading those figures
around the, um, app hits, and the Met- the
Facebook, and the, uh, social media, and all of those, and it's quite
impressive. But as you said, it's part of our DNA.
Um, we love our weather.
(laughs) Yeah.
And, you know, I'm one of those people that will go on to your app-
Yeah. ... about six or seven times a day.
(laughing)
So-
Me too.
(laughing)
... so, um, what if- what is the percentage, do you think, of the
adult population that you'd actually be reaching?
Is there a way of measuring that?
Um... Well, is there- is there a way of
measuring it? The, um...
The... Yeah. And it- and it- and it- and of course, it's- it's, um, it changes
quite a bit as well.
Mm. Mm.
So, I think o- on a, um, on a- on a- on an average day,
um, maybe, um, 400,000 people. So
hard to know. And we don't, we don't track who they are-
... so we don't know if they're adults-
Yeah.
... or, um,
youth, et cetera, et cetera. Um,
so, so, you know, uh, t- 10% on an average weather day
directly, but then indirectly, significantly more than
that. So through our, um, through our arrangements with,
um, traditional media-
Mm.
... um, online media, social media, um,
a much greater percentage. But, um, th- I don't have an
exact number.
We're about to do some research though, aren't we?
Um, the res- th- we are gonna do research.
We do do quite a bit of research to make sure that what we're doing is relevant and
future-focused. The- the piece that we're looking at right now is looking at our
severe weather warnings, so that core aspect-
Mm-hmm.
... of what we do. And, um, really going out and asking,
um, all asp- all aspects of society, you know, what would they like
to see from MetService to make, um, our advice e-
even more useful and even more actionable.
So we are, we do, we do go out, we do go out routinely and, and get
feedback. But we're- we're reaching, um, a large
portion of, uh, the public. We, you know, we
wanna keep pushing that. Ideally, we'll be reaching w- more people
every day and, um, providing r- a richer set of
information in the ways that might make sense to them.
Mm. Thank you.
Um, question from Dr. Vanessa Benney.
Thank you very much. Um, now, in this, um, transition,
um, has there been any, uh, change in
the accuracy of the service, um, provide- of the- of the
predi- weather prediction that's happening and occurring?
Um,
i- the, um... I just, uh, I had a, a question from a
constituent about whether MetService was still as reliable-
Yeah.
(laughs) ... as it always, uh, has been.
Definit- definitely no negative impacts.
And, um, um, and it- and it- and when we work with Earth Sciences
on the acquisition, top of mind all the time is, um,
protecting and enhancing that 24 by 7,
365 days e- a week, a year, operational role of
MetService.
Mm-hmm.
Um,
we have, um, you know, just, just through the, um,
startings of planning for the acquisition achieved a few
early wins.
Mm-hmm.
So there's a bit more collaboration that happens now between Earth Sciences and
MetService in the run-up to severe weather events.
So actually, for your constituent, there might be some improvements
coming through.
Yeah.
Um, l- longer term, through that joining up of
capabilities in a really purposeful and planned way, there, there will be
significant, um, enhancements actually.
Mm-hmm.
Um,
to Martin's point, um, MetService absolutely punches
above it- above its weight looking at any global benchmark.
You know, the, the, the range and quality of what we do for the size of our
organization, I mean, I was really impressive when, you know, when I interact with
my heads of MetService-
... colleagues from around the world. But, uh, we can definitely take that further.
You know?
We're a nation impacted by the weather of weather infuse, yes, and
we can, and we can, we can do even more in the future.
Hmm. Thank you.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Uh, Dr. David Wilson, a quick question.
Yeah. First up, um, thank you for over 50 years of the surface
pressure map. (laughs)
(laughs)
More things change, the more they stay the same.
Um, if you can widen the Southwest Pacific one, I'd be very appreciative.
Um, just wondering about, um, the
relationship, you know, Earth Sciences, MetService, you've got, uh,
this protection for three years of your brand.
How is this all fitting in with NIWA and GNS, and what does that look
like, um, from your perspective and as an overall?
Hm. Hmm. Yeah, so, um, so, so Earth Sciences
is the new CRI organization that's been formed
by the merger of, um, NIWA and GNS.
Yeah.
So that's, they're crack- cracking on with that.
Um,
and of course, MetService will become a subsidiary of that organization subject to
legislation in, in due course-
Mm-hmm.
... um, is the intention. So, um, you know, we've,
we've spoken quite a bit in this session so far about some of those opportunities
in terms of climate and associated impacts.
When, when you also think about GNS capability, there's some
potentially some longer term synergies in terms of, um,
operational, uh, wider ha-
hazards forecasting a- approach for New Zealand, so it's one of the things that's
kind of got potential for the future, and um, certainly the
organizations are aware of. Um, you know, but
really it focuses on joining up the whole climate, weather, and associated
impacts and, and then looking at some of those opportunities down the line.
And NIWA?
Yeah, so, so um, so, so NIWA is, is
the business unit now within Earth Sciences that we're interacting mostly
with.
Yeah.
Yeah, so that's, um... And, and of course this all started with a
weather forecast systems review that was MetService and NIWA and then the, uh,
forming of Earth Sciences kind of came along at, at a similar
time.
Yeah.
I think what, what, you know, what we're saying is, you know, I
think
widely perceived sort of tensions between what was NIWA
and MetService, uh, you know, concerns are list
sometimes around whether, um, there was confusion
about who to listen to, especially around severe weather
events. What is really significant about what's occurred in the
last, uh, six to nine months is the way in which the two
organizations have come together, are working together with common
objectives, uh, as Rob has just mentioned, particularly
around, uh, severe weather events, to ensure that there was
alignment around messaging and so on.
Yeah.
Um, so I, I, I think some of the
historical issues that, that I think have been widely
cited by others, you know, this process has actually
enabled the organizations, not withstanding the fact that we can't get ahead of the
legislation, to work together in a way which actually is good for New
Zealand.
Okay, final question from Rueben, Rueben Davidson.
Thank you. Sorry. (laughs)
(laughs) You can do a written question later on.
Madam Chair, um,
just to get a sense, with, with the merger, um, o- one of the
things that can happen is people can lose their jobs.
Um, so I'm keen to get a sense of whether there's been cuts
or, um, hiring freezes or positions left vacant through this
process. Um, and
yeah, so as a, as a starter, that's probably the first question.
Okay. So we'll just, I think, maybe have time only for that question. Yeah.
Thank you.
Okay. So, um, you know, the, the, the, um, the
acquisition process is, is predominantly about a better w- weather
forecasting system w- from within the existing
resources. Right? So, um, whilst it's, when we
get through, when we get further into this process, there will be
n- naturally so- some areas of duplication and overlap and some opportunities
for rationalization of some, uh,
capabilities. But in the whole, you know, when you look at
MetService and, you know, areas, um, such as support
functions co- you know, could be part of that mix.
In the whole though, when you look at what was NIWA and what is MetService,
the com- the capabilities don't overlap much.
It's highly complementary, so this is gonna be more a case of much more
opportunity from within the existing, um, set of
resources r- rather than loss of duplication.
So they have... Have there been freezes
on hiring through the process?
No. N- not from a MetService perspective.
You know, we are focused on running our business to support New
Zealand and keeping the business healthy and growing.
And I take, I take
We do-
Sorry.
Oh, you know, we do manage our cost base really carefully.
You know, we've always done that as an SOE and we're continuing to do that now.
But we, you know, you know, we, we, we're keeping the business, um, healthy
and productive and can have without any freezes in place.
Any-
I mean, we have been working actually also with, with,
um, Earth Sciences and their sort of predecessor organizations
in a way which actually has also enabled us on occasions to fill
roles, um, uh, our ch-
people, um, general manager is someone who was initially
seconded in from GNS, so you know, there, there are opportunities where we have
been s- able to kind of fill roles very efficiently and,
and favorably because of the relationship between the
organizations.
The time is up for this hearing, but any concluding remarks because this is the
final time, I guess, you will be at the MetService.
(laughs)
Well, perhaps I, perhaps I will...
You will, you will have seen in our annual report, we, we, we kind
of thought it might be our last annual report.
Yeah.
I suspect there may, there may be one more, but, um...
But you will have seen that we tried to tell the story of 30 years of-
It's very good.
... the MetService.
Mm-hmm.
And, uh, and you'll have, I hope, picked up from both Rob and I that, you
know, we are proud of what the MetService does.
Mm-hmm.
We're proud of the performance of the
organization, and we are very optimistic
and enthusiastic about what the future holds for
creating a much better fit for the future with the
climate forecasting and impacts service.
Mm-hmm. All the best, um, as you become part of Earth Sciences,
and good to see you. Thank you.
Thank you.
... very much.
Thanks all. Thank you.